SOURCE: https://www.bassmaster.com/news/bass-fishing-hall-of-fame-announces-2016-inductees/
TITLE: Bass Fishing Hall of Fame announces 2016 inductees - Bassmaster

A former United States president, a noted bass fishing educator and one of the most innovative designers of soft plastic lures will join the current 59 members when they are formally inducted into the Bass Fishing Hall of Fame (BFHOF) next March. During its fall meeting, the Hall’s Board of Directors announced they will honor President George H.W. Bush, Billy Murray and Gary Yamamoto at the Hall’s annual induction dinner. The event takes place DoubleTree Hilton in Tulsa, Okla., on Thursday, March 3, the eve of 2016 GEICO Bassmaster Classic presented by GoPro.
“While serving as both the Vice President and as our President, George Bush took exceptional interest in fisheries, water access and conservation issues – and is also a pretty good angler himself according to fellow Hall member Ray Scott,” said BFHOF Board president Sammy Lee. “Billy Murray has helped thousands of bass anglers find more fishing success through his involvement with the Bass Fishing Institute and his idea for a traveling ‘Hawg Trough.’ And Gary Yamamoto continues to develop some of the best baits out there, and is an accomplished angler in his own right. “
Bass anglers worldwide are invited to join the Hall’s Board of Directors to honor these men. In addition to the formal induction ceremonies, the BFHOF annual dinner also includes an exceptional silent auction featuring bucket-list fishing trips, premium rods and reels, hunting gear and special fishing-celebrity memorabilia. For information on the induction dinner – visit BassFishingHOF.com or the BFHOF Facebook page for more details, or call 888-690-2277.
Inductee biographies
George H.W. Bush – The 41st President of the United States, George H.W. Bush had a major and positive impact on sportfishing in general and bass fishing in particular during his term in office. As Vice President, Bush played a key role in the passage of the Wallop-Breaux amendments to the Sport Fish Restoration Act, which generates more than $650 million per year for sportfish restoration, access and other fishing and boating projects. In 2014 he received the inaugural KeepAmericaFishing Lifetime Achievement Award for his lifelong personal commitment to recreational fishing and conservation of America’s fisheries and wetlands. During his term as President, Bush established the first national policy goal of “no net loss” of wetlands, he established 56 new wildlife refuges, restored 3 million acres of wetlands and signed the Clean Air Act reauthorization that required cleaner burning fuels. A personal friend of Ray Scott, Johnny Morris and other leaders in the sportfishing industry, Bush used the “bully pulpit” of his office to promote recreational fishing.
Billy Murray –Billy is the twin brother of fishing legend Bobby Murray. While his brother is best known for his tournament prowess, Billy was making a name for himself behind the scenes within the industry. Murray’s fingers have been all over the bass fishing world. In 1975 Murray formed and organized the Bass Fishing Institute, a forerunner of today’s Bass University. Murray traveled the country with a select group of anglers educating tens of thousands on bass fishing. As part of that effort, Murray created a 30-feet long traveling aquarium commonly referred to as the “Hawg Trough.” Those aquariums are still used today and are a common part of the fishing world. Murray, an employee of PRADCO for almost three decades, also was instrumental in designing many of today’s popular lures. In addition, he served as cameraman/producer for 10 years on the Fishin’ Hole show in its early years of becoming the longest running outdoor show on television. In the 1990s, Murray, along with his brother Bobby, starred in their own television show The Guys, that aired on ESPN.
Gary Yamamoto –Yamamoto, founder of Gary Yamamoto Custom Lures, is credited with numerous innovations in the design and manufacturing of soft plastic lures. His Senko is one of the most important lure developments in recent years, and his other creations, including the Hula Grub, are mainstays in anglers tackle boxes the world over. A very successful professional angler in his own right, Yamamoto sponsors numerous pros in the United States, Europe and Japan, and is also publisher of Inside Line Magazine.