SOURCE: http://www.bassfan.com/news_article/1545/Yamamoto-Defies-Age--Through-Work-Fresh-Air
TITLE: Yamamoto Defies Age<br> Through Work, Fresh Air

Gary Yamamoto's two-tour season in 2005 would be considered solid by anyone's standards. For a 62-year-old who owns and operates two separate and entirely distinct businesses, well, it was a lot better than that.
He had a Top 10 finish on each tour and went on to place 7th in the FLW points and 36th in the Bassmaster points. He had only three triple-digit outings (down from seven the year before) and if not for a poor 2004 campaign, he'd be a lot higher than 59th in the State Farm World Rankings.
Because he's in excellent health, he doesn't think his age is much of a factor in his on-water performance. His ultra-busy lifestyle helps to keep his body fit and his focus sharp.
"I'm a businessman, but I'm not a desk person," he said. "I'm always working and I do mostly outside work, so I stay physically active. I feel that I can still compete. It's just a matter of concentrating and getting in there and getting it done."
Several Irons in the Fire
BassFans know that Yamamoto is the owner of a successful bait company that bears his name. Many also know that he's the owner of Gary Yamamoto Custom Beef, which comes from stock raised on his five ranches in east Texas.
Some might not know that he does the vast majority of the landscape work on the ranches himself. His favorite part is building dams to create stock ponds, and he's proficient in the operation of several types of heavy equipment â bulldozers, trackhoes and dumptrucks among them.
"I'm always moving from one piece (of equipment) to another, so that gets me a lot of exercise," he said. "And I enjoy it because you accomplish something. I have a 400-acre pasture on my biggest ranch that's all rolling hills, and when I'm done it'll have ponds and dams. Because I raise cattle, I need those things. When you can take a wooded, swampy area and turn it into a fine pasture, to me, that's quite an accomplishment."
The beef his company sells comes from hybrid stock that's half Wagyu (the dominant breed in Japan, renowned for producing that country's famous Kobe beef) and half Angus. The latter is a faster-growing breed that produces more beef per pound of feed.
At any given time, his herd averages about 6,000 head. He hopes to increase that to 10,000-plus in the near future.
"It's not only delicious, but it's the healthiest beef in the world (to eat) because it has more unsaturated fat than saturated," he said. "In a few years, I think the beef side of the business will be larger than the baits."
Fishing is Business Too
His career as a tournament angler is his primary method of promotion for his other business â soft-plastic baits, which include the hugely popular Senko. He said he'll continue to compete until his health no longer permits it, and he currently has no concerns in that regard. The only other reason he'd quit is if the demands of the beef business become too great to afford him the time.
He said he continues to learn more about bass and how to catch them as time goes on. "Every year you fish you learn a few more tricks and learn how to solve some of the problems you've had before," he said. "You add a few more pieces to the puzzle."
For instance, early last season he started to use braided line for the first time, but was throwing it on a rod with glass-type guides. He lost numerous fish, including some that broke the line.
"One day in a Bassmaster tournament, I had six fish that I should have caught and I only brought in two," he said. "I didn't realize those guides had cracked. So I went to titanium guides, and that solved the problem.
"For a flipper like myself, if I miss a fish or two, it hurts."
Disappointing Decision
Yamamoto has competed in 81 Bassmaster events since 1988, but has opted not to fish the Elite Series this year. He'll limit himself to the FLW Tour and the new FLW Series.
"It's disappointing, but for me, there was no real decision to be made," he said. "Bassmaster is just out of line, as far as I'm concerned. I don't think their entry-fee and payback system are going to work. The way I see it, they took a step back instead of forward.
"I'm disappointed because I worked very hard to get to the Bassmaster Tour. But now, it's just economically not right."
He's always favored the FLW Tour's unlimited practice policy. Because of his other commitments, he sometimes gets to spend only 3 or 4 days at a venue prior to the start of a tournament, but he doesn't believe that should be the case for everyone.
"I like open practices where you can go whenever you can," he said. "And if somebody can afford to spend a month practicing for a tournament, more power to them. That's how people get good."
Notable
> Yamamoto has been trying to catch some crappie at one of his ranch ponds to transplant to a new impoundment, but he hasn't been successful. "I'm using 4-pound test line and 1/16- or 1/32-ounce jigheads and little tiny grubs," he said. "I can't catch crappie, but I've caught 7-pound bass. Something like that makes me think that we're missing opportunities to catch fish that are there, but just won't eat a big bait. I know the crappie are there, but I guess they know they don't want to go into the new pond. I might have to wait until spring when they start biting again."
> His five ranches encompass about 10,000 total acres. All are within a 60-mile stretch.