SOURCE: https://thefishingwire.com/matt-on-em-robertson-hops-on-the-scum-frog-team/
TITLE: Matt ‘On ‘Em’ Robertson Hops On The Scum Frog Team

OCEAN SPRINGS, MISSISSIPPI – American Baitworks is excited to announce the addition of Bassmaster Elite Series angler Matt Robertson to our pro fishing team representing Scum Frog.
Robertson joins American Baitworks Pro’s Cliff Crochet (MLF), Greg Vinson (MLF), JT Kenney (MLF), Jeremy Lawyer (MLF), Bryan Thrift (MLF), Scott Dobson (MLF), Lee Livesay (Bassmaster Elite), Justin Hamner (Bassmaster Elite), Scott Canterbury (Bassmaster Elite), Bryan New (Bassmaster Elite), Matty Wong (Bassmaster Elite) Chris Zaldain (Bassmaster Elite) and Patrick Walters (Bassmaster Elite).
Matt Robertson
Robertson has quickly become one of the most recognizable anglers fishing the Bassmaster Elite Series. Matt’s no-nonsense, downhome personality and friendly, competitive attitude has made him popular amongst fans and his Bassmaster competitors. Robertson’s personality fits the Scum Frog brand effortlessly, and his journey to the Elite Series is relatable to all.
Robertson starts his 2022 season having qualified for the Bassmaster Classic three times and multiple top-ten finishes.
“I love throwing hollow-bodied frogs almost any time of year and am excited to partner with Scum Frog and show off the performance of our products,” said Matt Robertson. “The Launch Frog and Trophy Series Frog are legendary, and I’m excited to put it them to work and crush some giant bass on the water this season.”
About American Baitworks
Scum Frog is a part of American Baitworks Co. and is known for legendary performance with explosive catches! Built to exceed your frogging expectations.
American Baitworks Co. is an innovative American-based fishing tackle company that provides custom manufacturing of fishing lures and products for our customer’s specifications. Our family of brands includes: BaitFuel, NetBait, Halo Fishing, Snag Proof, Scum Frog, Freedom Tackle, and STH Bait Co.
Our passion for fishing runs deep at American Baitworks Co., where our focus on innovation and advancing the sport of fishing never ends.
From our manufacturing and distribution center on the coast of Mississippi, USA, we want anglers of every level to have the best experience every time they’re on the water.
Follow along with this season’s action on Facebook and Instagram:
Facebook: American Baitworks
Instagram: @scum.frog