SOURCE: https://www.wired2fish.com/viral/top-5-matt-robertson-ugly-stik-moments-at-the-2021-bassmaster-classic
TITLE: Top 5 Matt Robertson Ugly Stik Moments at the 2021 Bassmaster Classic

The 2021 Bassmaster Classic was an important milestone for Ugly Stik and the first Ugly Stik pro, Matt Robertson. The Kentucky-grown Bassmaster Elite Series pro will have many eyes on him as the circuit heads north to complete the 2021 season. Since the Bassmaster Classic, Robertson has gained a lot of new fans––fans who can relate to an angler who just wants to catch fish and have a good time. And while Robertson, (bare) armed with his Ugly Stik Carbon rods, finished seventh at the Classic, he made just as many waves off the water as his did on Lake Ray Roberts. Look for him to make more this week at Lake Champlain.
MAKING IT RAIN
Robertson went Stone Cold style with bottled waters at the Day 1 weigh in. Possibly feeling threatened by Robertson’s splash, Mother Nature responded with a storm of her own Saturday morning, delaying the start of Day 2 by a couple of hours.
THE RIGHT TO BEAR ARMS
There are regulations about what is required to be on an angler’s apparel when crossing the Bassmaster stage. An American flag and the B.A.S.S. logo “need to be visible.” Robertson made sure they were by tattooing both onto his left shoulder so he could rock a stylish cut-off T-shirt
HOT ROD
Fishing rods don’t have to cost a fistful of Benjamins to keep you in contention at the Bassmaster Classic. Robertson’s Ugly Stik Carbon rods come in at less than $80 and are sensitive enough that he doesn’t have to be, leaving him more time to worry about slamming hooks home and yanking big fish out of heavy cover.
ON’ EM
Robertson’s signature hat says “ON ‘EM” and he definitely was during Day 1 of the Classic, bringing a 16-pound, 4-ounce limit to the stage, which put him in sixth place after the first day of competition.
DRESSED TO KILL
It’s not just the weigh-in stand where Robertson puts his fashion sense on display. He made a statement at the pre-Classic Champion’s Dinner with a snakeskin jacket and custom boots.
For more information on the Ugly Stik Carbon rods Robertson used to capture a Top-10 finish at the 2021 Bassmaster Classic, go to www.uglystik.com. To get better acquainted with Robertson and see why his style is the perfect fit for a do-it-all, good-time rod like Ugly Stik, follow him on Instagram @onem_fishing.