SOURCE: https://www.bassmaster.com/column/cory-johnston/a-special-week-on-familiar-waters/
TITLE: A special week on familiar waters - Bassmaster

Every time my brother and I put our boats in the water, our goal is to win the tournament. It sounds simple, but at the top levels of the sport it’s remarkably difficult. Many great competitors, even Angler of the Year winners, have fished a whole career and won one or two, or none at all. My recent victory at the St. Lawrence River was special simply because Bassmaster Elite Series victories are so challenging, but several other things made it extra meaningful.
First and foremost was the fact that my family could be there. You’ve probably heard it said before, but it bears repeating – without an understanding and supporting family, you simply cannot have success in this sport. By the nature of our schedule, we sometimes miss birthdays, graduations and other events, so I cherish the times we can all be together. It’s also important to me my boys see how hard I work and the results that come from hard work.
Second, I was there to see my brother Chris hoist up the Progressive Bassmaster Angler of the Year trophy. I won’t be satisfied until I have one (or more) of my own, but he’s an amazing angler and one of the hardest workers I’ve ever met. He kept the pace up until the very end and deserves all of the accolades he gets.
Also, it was meaningful I won not just one but two Elite events this year: At the St. Johns River in April and now at the St. Lawrence. They’re two very different fisheries. One is largemouth; one is smallmouth. On one I chased shallow fish, and on the other I was deep. I like to believe that my consistency and success on tour comes because I’m a well-rounded angler. I don’t feel like there’s a technique at which I cannot excel, which means that it’s a matter of figuring out what I need to do and then executing to the best of my abilities.
Finally, this victory will forever be etched in my mind because of what I went through to earn it. Fishing out on Lake Ontario is not for the unprepared or weak willed. You may have seen I got a little sick in the big waves, and lost my footing and almost fell in the water on more than one occasion, but I persevered.
After last year’s sixth-place finish, I had angrily vowed to never make a cast on the river again. I don’t blame the guys who saw the wind and waves on Day 3 and elected to give up on their plan to go out to the lake, but I’ve prepared my whole life for that moment. All of my equipment is up to the task, and I feel comfortable that I can get there and back safely. Additionally, I know what it takes to stay on top of the fish. Chris couldn’t make the run because he had to play it a little bit safer for AOY, but I felt strongly I could and should make the run. It paid off.
Now there’s a bit more fishing locally, and then I’ll spend some time in the deer woods. Before you know it, the 2025 season will be here, and everything good that happened just increased my will to win. Earning that first Elite Series trophy made me want a second, and now that I have two I know there are more in my future.