SOURCE: https://blog.power-pole.com/cold-water-bass-tactics-with-cory-johnston/
TITLE: Cold-water Bass tactics with Cory Johnston | Power-Pole presents..

Cold-water Bass tactics with Cory Johnston
Angler TipsB.A.S.S. / FLW angler and Power-Pole ambassador Cory Johnston dives into targeting smallmouth, largemouth and spotted bass during cold-water months.
“Everything from your technique to the fish themselves pretty much slows down when it gets cold in that 40-degree range,” says Johnston. “You have to adapt and change your tactics to fit the stage, meaning targeting the middle to bottom of the water column and working lures with a sluggish style.”
Johnston lays out his top three top tips for bigmouth success in chilly waters:
#1 – Use suspending jerkbaits and deep-drop jigs.
“Largemouth bass are suspending in the water column or sitting on or close to the bottom in winter. I use the Jackall Rerange Jerkbait and slow-twitch it to get the hit. Or I utilize a 3/8– to ¾-ounce Punisher football jig in natural coloring like green pumpkin and bounce it off the bottom. For smallmouth bass, I find they seem to key in on tube jigs or a Jackall Rhythm Wave 3.8 swimbait better.”
#2 – Power-Pole Drift Paddles can play a key part in success when fishing Canada’s lakes.
“During cold-water months, I slow drag jigs, so when I deploy the Power-Pole Drift Paddles, they allow me to dial down the drift and control my presentation for more-effective casting and a better hookup ratio. You can be more methodical — and thus more productive — when using the paddles to stay in the strike zone.”
#3 – Drop the Power-Pole shallow water anchors.
“Generally, I’m fishing shallower 2- to 10-foot depths. I can drop the poles outside of a sand patch, boulder or weed edge and work the area hard for multiple hookups. Remember, these bass are moving super slow, and you really have to work an area over hard to get a strike. The pole lets me stay right on top of the spot to make repeated casts to get bass interested.”
Recent Posts
- The 2026 Bassmaster Classic — By The Numbers
- Mark Zona Adds the MOVE ZR Trolling Motor to His Power-Pole Setup
- What to Expect from Power-Pole at the 2026 Bassmaster Classic
- Power-Pole Recap: Hank Cherry Closes Strong to Win 2026 Bassmaster Elite Opener at Lake Guntersville
- 2026 MLF Bass Pro Tour Kicks Off at Lake Guntersville
- The Holiday Gift Guide
Republication Policy
All content, including text, photos and other multimedia, appearing in the “News & Press Releases” category may be republished in part or in whole on third-party sites. Please provide a link back to the original content.