SOURCE: https://www.bassmaster.com/elite/news/daily-limit-cory-johnston-relieved-to-join-canadian-club-of-winners/
TITLE: Daily Limit: Cory Johnston relieved to join Canadian club of winners - Bassmaster

The chirping will stop. Cory Johnston won’t have to take any more grief.
Reminded often he was the only Canadian without an Elite Series trophy, Cory finally scored a beauty win in the MAXAM Tire Bassmaster Elite at St. Johns River last month. And his second B.A.S.S. title gave the 38-year-old from Cavan, Ontario, a leg up on his stiffest competition – his little brother Chris.
“It felt good,” said Cory, who’s suffered more from their friends than Chris, his business partner who became the first Canadian Elite winner. “I heard a little bit from him, but not too much. He just has that trophy right there in his house, so every time I walk in there I see it on the shelf.”
Jeff Gustafson’s victory at the 2021 Tennessee River Elite, and subsequent Classic win there in 2023, made Cory the only Canuck shut out. A proud Canadian with several close misses and a blunder that cost him the 2019 Bassmaster Angler of the Year title, Cory was sore about it. The rough crowd they run with pointed their barbs at him.
“We’ve given him a hard time for the past five years, even before Gussy won,” Chris said. “I was the first one to win a B.A.S.S. tournament. Then it started.
“Not so much from me and Gussy, but more from our friends. They referred to him as Chris’ brother. That was the joke. He’s never going to win one, he keeps blowing tournaments. It never ended.”
The chirping among that group is relentless, says Bassmaster emcee Dave Mercer, who as a Canadian gets in his digs while also leading the north of the border cheering section. He said Cory would have suffered greatly if he had lost his 14-pound, Day 3 lead at the St. Johns.
“He would have lived a life of pain,” Mercer said. “Not just from his brother, but from (Seth) Feider and Matt (Robertson) and Lee Livesay and everybody who hangs around that group. They chirp relentlessly, like they literally get into fights over what line to use.”
Cory, who was on pace for 100 pounds after two days, closed with 19-9 to total 93-6 and win by 21-2, the second largest margin of victory in the Elites. It provided him a big shot of shut-up juice.
Mercer met the anglers as kids and watched them rise in the sport. He was certain Cory was steamed about playing second fiddle.
“I always joke with Cory that Chris is the reason you call the first four years of your life the good ole days, because ever since he showed up, life has kinda stunk. He’s better at everything,” said Mercer, who broached the subject with the Johnston’s on his recent podcast. “On paper, now Cory has more.
“So all of a sudden, Chris is that lonely guy with just one. He went from Chris the dominant one to the only one of the three original Canadians – you have to remove Cooper (Gallant) because he’s just getting started – who hasn’t won multiple Bassmaster events.”
Chris still disputes that. Cory’s cock of the walk claim includes his 2021 St. Croix Open win at 1000 Islands.
“Opens don’t count,” Chris said. “I got him on major wins. I won an FLW Tour, so I still got bragging rights.”
“Opens don’t count?” Cory responded. “He can say whatever he wants. Like Mercer said, he’s counting the FLW and they’re not even in business anymore.”
The rough-talking continues, but the Johnstons pull for each other since they pool their winnings into a single bank account. Yet they’ll always chase bragging rights.
The Johnstons, who have never missed a Classic in their five years at B.A.S.S., have incredible and nearly identical statistics. Cory has fished 61 events with 21 Top 10 finishes, including three seconds and four third-place finishes. In Chris’ 60 entries, he has 20 Top 10s, with five runner-up finishes and a third.
Both are in the top handful in earnings per event. Cory has $860,180 in B.A.S.S. earnings for an average of $14,101 per event, while Chris’ total of $885,571 averages to paydays of $14,759.
“Who’s got the overall money winnings? That’s an important stat,” Chris said. “So, I still got bragging rights.”
Mercer has long equated the Johnstons’ arrival on the Elites to the Hanson Brothers in the movie “Slap Shot.” They came in skating fast, slamming the opposition into the boards and putting shots on goal. With Gallant’s 2022 Open win, Canadians have slapped six biscuits in the basket since 2020.
The Johnstons have also been close in the Progressive Bassmaster Angler of the Year races. In 2022, Chris finished third after a late run gained 90 points in the season-ending northern tournaments. Chris took second in Seth Feider’s amazingly consistent 2021 campaign, while Cory was fifth.
Cory had the best chance in 2019, but suffered a mechanical demise. Forced to borrow a boat at the St. Lawrence River, Cory didn’t notice its clock wasn’t set correctly. With 22 pounds that would have put him in the Top 10, the penalty for his seven-minute late arrival cost him more than just 7 pounds. He missed the two-day cut by ounces and finished 37th, the only time he hasn’t made a Top 10 on his home waters.
Cory ended up eight points back of AOY winner Scott Canterbury. Chris said that remains too touchy a subject to rub in.
“Cost him AOY, 100%,” Chris said. “He probably would have won the tournament, too, because the fish were just loaded.”
Both Johnstons have a shot at AOY this year. Chris stands third, 38 points behind leader Trey McKinney. Cory is fifth, 45 back. After taking their sons turkey hunting and fishing, the Johnstons are headed back south for this week’s Minn Kota Bassmaster Elite at Lake Murray, where they hope to do better than last year. Cory was just inside the cut at 41st and Chris finished 63rd.
The Elite schedule resumes a month later with two Alabama events, at Wheeler and Smith lakes, before closing the year in New York at Lake Champlain and the St. Lawrence River.
“Lake Murray, I’m kind of looking forward to a little bit,” Cory said. “The two Alabama tournaments, those are the two I’m worried about. I don’t have much experience on those lakes. If I can get through the next three events and just have a shot at AOY, I’ll be happy.”
The last frontier for Canadians are the AOY and Dakota Lithium Rookie of the Year titles. Evan Kung, who leads the Tackle Warehouse Elite Qualifier standings, might be the guy to accomplish ROY in 2025, and the Johnstons are skating up ice looking to score in 2024.
“I think it’s in their head that it’s the last first for Canadians, the first Canadian AOY,” Mercer said. “I do think it’s cool to see them panning out, but I like to see everyone win. I got to say that, but I honestly feel like that.
“You have a special connection with certain people. I’ve known Gussy since he was a little kid too. So to watch him win the Classic was special, but it was awesome to see Justin Hamner win this year.”
The Johnstons know the season isn’t even at second intermission. There’s five more events and a lot can happen, but they’d love their chances if the game’s close at season’s end.
“Get me to the St. Lawrence,” Cory said. “I’m looking forward to getting up north”
If either one gets out in front, they could be looking at a breakaway shot on their final shift of 2024.
“I’m not getting overexcited yet,” Chris said. “Get some good finishes in the next three and ideally be within 20 points. Go north within striking distance. That would be ideal to win AOY and finish up on St. Lawrence, with a win on top of that. Beating Cory, that would be a perfect ending.”
And he’d never hear the end of it.