SOURCE: https://kevinvandam.com/how-to-fish-a-swim-jig-and-select-the-right-color-a-technique-with-kvd/
TITLE: How to fish a swim jig and select the right color - a technique with KVD · The Official Web Site of Kevin VanDam

Fishing a swim jig is all about knowing the right depth and shallow cover conditions needed to make it most effective. A swim jig is different, and you have to fish it differently. Fish it up high, and shake it along in the water. Check out this technique and color recommendations.
When fishing grass, scattered pads, and boat docks across a wide variety of regions, a swim jig lure is right for you! Like and subscribe to this channel for non-stop fishing and outdoor sports tips, conversation, advice, and the best bass fishing community online.
Strike King KVD heavy cover swim jig: https://bassproshops.vzck.net/XY6DJ3
Strike King Rage Craw: https://bassproshops.vzck.net/Jz1EDv
Strike King KVD Swim Jig https://bassproshops.vzck.net/daJNeq
For all your bass fishing and outdoor sports needs: https://bassproshops.vzck.net/WqGoYO
KVD Mustad Fishing hooks: https://bassproshops.vzck.net/y2mNzv
You know my favorite way to fish a swim jig is kind of fishing it along shaking it up high in the water column. A swim jig is different—they’re built differently.
I mean you can swim any kind of jig but this is a Strike King KVD swim jig and it’s got a bullet-shaped head, it’s got a medium weed guard to it so it’s not designed for thick heavy brush and things like that, and it’s got a stout hook. This particular one is the heavy cover model, and I’ve got a rage craw on it.
Why the Rage Craw Works
What I like about a rage craw is it’s got that wide swimming action to it and it helps you kind of keep it up high in the water column.
Choosing Swim Jig Colors
So my three basic colors are black and blue, blue gill, and Shad. You need those three basic colors.
Line and Cover Considerations
I’m going to fish it on braided line, but for a cover like this where you got grass, scattered pads, bushes, boat docks, things like that, I mean it’s a bait you can put anywhere. A swim jig fits the bill in so many areas. You know it doesn’t matter if you’re in Florida, Texas, Michigan, the Potomac River, or New York—wherever there are a lot of places that have this type of cover, a swim jig really fits the bill.
FAQs
-
Top 3 Need to Have finesse Baits: Springtime Finesse Bass Fishing Tips
-
How to find fishing spots from banks of ponds, streams, lakes and rivers
-
How to Find Bass in Spawning Grass Beds with KVD