SOURCE: https://kevinvandam.com/the-best-bass-fishing-advice-by-kvd/
TITLE: The Best Bass Fishing Advice By KVD · The Official Web Site of Kevin VanDam

The two questions that I get asked more than anything else are: “What’s your favorite bait for heavy grass?” and “How do you break down a strange lake?” These are universal things.
Key Factors in Lure Selection
What I want to do always, when I’m choosing any lure for any situation, is take into account all the things that you can see around. You know, the water clarity, the depth, the time of the year, the water temperature, the type of cover, the current, if the water is rising or falling—all these things matter.
Learning from the Best
The best anglers that I know and have watched over my career, like Rick Clunn, Denny Brauer, and Larry Nixon, have perception skills that are second to none. They are better than the rest of the field for a reason. A lot of those guys love to hunt, and their senses are very in tune with noticing subtle changes and differences in nature. This is really important.
Choosing the Right Bait
When you’re going to choose a bait, you want to pick one that’s going to be the most efficient with all those factors in mind, considering the weather conditions and the potential mood of the fish. For example, you might be able to throw a frog over a grass mat, and it could be very efficient.
However, if a cold front has come through, causing high pressure and a 10-degree drop in water temperature overnight, the fish might not come up to bite a frog. In this case, you’d need to punch something down through the grass to get those fish to eat. Conditions really matter.
Favorite Baits for Heavy Grass
When asked, “What’s your favorite bait for fishing heavy grass?” it’s clear there’s a multitude of options, depending on the conditions. Here are some examples:
- Punch Rig: A Strike King Slither Rig with a punch bug or a Menace is a favorite for fishing really heavy grass.
- Frog: If the water is shallow, a frog can be cast a long way. It has a lot of action, and you can work it over the top of the grass. Using a popping grass frog adds noise and attracts fish.
There are always multiple baits that you can use in every situation. In many cases, several baits will work, and the best one to use is often the one you have the most confidence in.
The Modern Angler’s Toolbox
Today, we have many more tools in our tackle box than we used to. Every lure is just a tool. You have to use the right tool for the right job, just like using the right club for the right shot in golf. That’s why you have all those clubs in your bag—to use the precise right club for the distance and angle you need to come to the green.
In fishing, it’s the same. You want to use the right lure for all the circumstances you face at the time to be the most efficient based on all those conditions.
Head over to Bass Pro Shops to get the top-quality fishing tools I rely on. For all your bass fishing and outdoor sport’s needs: https://bassproshops.vzck.net/WqGoYO
FAQs
-
How to approach a new fishing lake —Bass Master Class with KVD
-
How to Improve Your Clover Food Plots by Frost Seeding
-
How to find fishing spots from banks of ponds, streams, lakes and rivers
-
How to win a fishing tournament? Tactics and Techniques
-
How to Fish Jerkbaits for Prespawn Smallmouth Bass? Pre Spawn Bass Fishing Tips