SOURCE: https://www.wired2fish.com/tackle-reviews/duckett-white-ice-casting-rod-review
TITLE: Duckett Jacob Wheeler Select Series Casting Rod Review

I’ve used hundreds if not thousands of different fishing rods throughout my life, however a select few have a special place in my heart. One line of rods that are really special to me is the Duckett Micro Magic line of rods. This was the first fishing rod I ever purchased, and I was extremely fond of it for years to come. I recently got a few more Duckett rods to add to my lineup, and I’ve been super excited to try them out. The first rod I’ve been able to extensively test is the Duckett Jacob Wheeler Select Series Casting Rod. This is a super versatile line of rods that provides both performance and comfort all at a competitive price point.
JW SELECT SERIES BUILD
The Duckett Jacob Wheeler Select Series Casting Rods are designed for competitive anglers who are looking to upgrade from the classic Jacob Wheeler signature series. Featuring innovative features like X-Helical Coil Construction, Carbon Nano Technology, and Tri-Level graphite integration this rod is build to preform. The Duckett Select Series is crafted using Sensi-Touch rod blanks that are both sensitive and lightweight without compromising durability.
The two-layer carbon fiber scrim adds to the durability of the rod, while the proprietary Kigan Artus 316 SS ring locks, double-flanged tip, and double-footed elevated stripper guide allow for accurate casts while minimizing line friction. Providing anglers with exceptional performance, the Duckett Jacob Wheeler Select Series Casting Rods are available in a variety of actions that provide versatility for a wide range of bass fishing applications.
JW SELECT SERIES FEATURES
I’ve used a number of different Duckett rods over the last several years, each one boasting its own unique features. After using the Duckett Jacob Wheeler Select Series Casting Rods however, I can safely say this is my favorite line of rods from Duckett Fishing. One of my favorite features included in this line of rods is the Sensi-Touch rod blanks these rods are constructed around. I currently own the 7-foot 1-inch Medium-Heavy Action casting rod, and I’ve used it for a variety of power fishing techniques. This style of fishing requires a light, sensitive and durable rod, especially when you’re using it for extended periods of time. This rod provides me with enough sensitivity to detect subtle bites without feeling like it’s going to break on a hard hookset.
JW SELECT SERIES APPLICATIONS
Another feature I’ve really enjoyed on the Duckett Jacob Wheeler Select Series Casting Rod is the versatile range of sizes and actions these rods are available in. While they only have four different models, each rod is perfectly tailored for a different fishing technique. Ive had the opportunity to test out two different models, and I can safely say they preformed flawlessly. I currently use both the 7-foot 1-inch Medium-Heavy casting rod and the 7-foot 4-inch Medium-Heavy Moderate-Fast casting rod. I prefer the shorter rod for fishing around tight cover such as docks, laydowns and overhands. This rods is great for throwing jigs, spinnerbaits and other single hook baits that require a hard hookset.
The 7-foot 4-inch model however is great for offshore power fishing techniques such as cranking or throwing big swimbaits. The larger rod is great for making longer casts as well as throwing oversized baits. Another essential feature for throwing larger sized crankbaits is a moderate action. This parabolic bend allows the rod to load as you set the hook which greatly increases your landing percentage when using treble hook baits such as a crankbait. This rod has quickly become one of my go to rods for the majority of my deep summertime cranking applications.
I’ve been a fan of Duckett rods since I was a little kid, and I can safely say their new line of rods exceeds all expectations. They have created a versatile line of rods that provide high dollar performance at a competitive price point. If you’re looking to invest in a new rod this summer, I highly recommend checking out the Jacob Wheeler Select Series Casting Rods from Duckett Fishing.