SOURCE: https://www.westernbass.com/article/jacob-wheeler-s-small-swimbaits-and-why
TITLE: Jacob Wheeler’s Small Swimbaits: When and Why

Everyone knows that bass are heavily focused on shad this time of year and the best way to catch bass is to imitate what they are eating.
One of the best ways to do it is with a soft plastic swimbait and that’s one of Jacob Wheeler’s top weapons right now and throughout the rest of the year when bass are eating small baitfish. Depending on the lake type and situation, he will vary the bait he uses, but the same principle applies as he is doing his best to imitate a tiny morsel.
3 and 4-inch swimmers
When the bass are eating small baitfish, a jighead and small swimbait is a great way to catch them. That’s something that Wheeler has been fishing a lot this offseason because it gets bit.
“I love fishing the offseason in a non-tournament situation because you just want to go out and catch as many bass as possible,” he said. “This time of year, that means finding the baitfish first and the bass keep you on your toes because they are constantly moving and chasing baitfish. You might catch them good one day and come back the next and nothing because they’ve moved on. It forces you to adapt and change, which I really like.”
Finding the baitfish is his first goal and Wheeler will change his approach and lure based on the lake type. “You always hear about how bass chase shad into the backs of the creeks this time of year, and I agree with that to an extent,” Wheeler began. “That can be a good place to start, but you must also remember the depth to target. On highland reservoirs with clean water, it could be 15 to 30 feet of water in the pockets and drains in creeks, and on lowland reservoirs, it will be much shallower. In the lowland reservoirs like the Tennessee River lakes, the fish will be more focused on gizzard shad, and using a bigger bait in 3 to 5 feet of water might be the deal. It all depends on the lake and what the fish are eating.”
For a smaller bait, he likes the 3-inch Crush City Mayor on a 3.8 or 1.2-ounce VMC Moon Eye head and for matching bigger baitfish, he goes with the 4-inch size on either a ¼-ounce head or VMC Weighted Willow Swimbait Hook when fishing shallow grass.
“The jighead or hook you choose is all about being efficient, and I like the heavier heads for the smaller swimbait because I want it to get down quicker,” he said. “The bigger Mayor is something I typically use in shallower water, so I want to use a lighter weight or a weedless Texas-Rig when fishing around cover.”
Wheeler had a big part in the design of the Mayor swimbaits, and he mainly wanted something different. “I wanted it to have a good wobble but not aggressive,” he said. “Those subtle changes to the action can make a big difference in getting bites.”
“Swimbaits”
As the small swimbait trend has continued, anglers are “swimming” more soft plastic baits, including fishing baitfish imitators and fluke-style baits through the water column. Wheeler was one of the anglers who let the cat out of the bag with this technique when he won a Bass Pro Tour stop on Lake Guntersville, Alabama, in May with the Crush City Freeloader.
It worked then on a heavily pressured Guntersville in prime ledge fishing season and he’s continued to utilize it the rest of the year, including recent trips this fall.
“The main thing with the Freeloader is that it’s a cadence deal and everyone thinks it’s only good when watching your forward-facing sonar, but it’s not,” he said. “I fish it in 2 feet of water for shallow schools and out in 50 feet for suspended bass. The main thing is that the cadence is slower than a swimbait and you can trigger those fish that are eating baitfish but aren’t as likely to chase.”
Wheeler likes to fish the Freeloader on a 3/16 to 5/16-ounce VMC Hybrid Swimbait Jig because of what it does to his soft plastic bait.
“That head has a 60-degree line tie and allows the bait to rock more,” he said. “That’s the action you want as the bait moves through the water as you slowly shake it. This technique is great for areas where you know fish are, but they aren’t biting a swimbait. It’s not very effective for covering water because you fish it much slower.”
As the current best tournament bass angler in the world, Jacob Wheeler has proven that he can catch them everywhere with any technique under the sun. Right now, he says fishing small swimbaits is the way to go if you want to catch bass and lots of them in the fall.