SOURCE: https://1source.basspro.com/index.php/component/k2/63-bass-fishing/3609-3-bassmaster-elite-series-pros-share-plastic-worms-for-summertime-bass
TITLE: 3 Bassmaster Elite Series pros Share Plastic Worms for Summertime Bass | Bass Pro Shops

Oh yeah, it's time to get your bassy little buddies all fired up and ready to play this summer. Nothing like rippin' lips and getting your fishing rod bent to intensify the summer heat.
The old standby plastic worm is one of the best weapons to use to stick a few fat bass this year when the weather heats up. Three Bassmaster Elite Series pros, Josh Bertrand, Randy Howell and Brandon Palaniuk share with Pros4- 1Source what gear they use and their favorite cover to fish plastic worms for summertime bass.
Josh Bertrand
"For me, it's the 10-inch Berkley Power Worm in plum. That's my summer go-to plastic worm. I'll fish it Texas-rigged usually with a 3/8-ounce weight around a variety of cover. Rockpiles, brushpiles or patches of submerged grass are all good."
Bertrand's fishing gear consists of 7'6' medium-heavy action Abu Garcia Veracity rod with a 7.1 Revo MGX reel loaded with 15-pound Trilene 100% fluorocarbon.
Randy Howell
"I like the Yamamoto 7.75-inch Kut Tail worm and the 12-inch Curly Tail worm. Both in green pumpkin with red fleck or plum. Instead of a Texas rig, I like to fish them on my ½-ounce Lunker Lure Magnum Football Shakey Head. It's one of my signature items from Lunker Lure. I really like it. I like to target rocky points and ledges with that set up."
Howell's rod, reel and line consist of a Daiwa Steez XT 7'4' extra heavy rod and a Tatula CT 8.1 reel spooled with 16-pound Gamma fluorocarbon.
Brandon Palaniuk
"I stick with a pretty standard summer set up. A 10-inch Power Worm in plum color. I'll use a ½-ounce Eco Pro Tungsten weight and a 4/0 VMC HD worm hook. I like to fish offshore and target shell bars or brushpiles."
Palaniuk's set up includes a 7'6" medium-heavy action Abu Garcia Fantasista Regista rod and an Abu Garcia Revo MGXtreme reel spooled with 15-pound Trilene 100% fluorocarbon.
- 4099 views