SOURCE: https://www.westernbass.com/article/reels-winter-bass-fishing-brandon-palaniuk
TITLE: Reels for Winter Bass Fishing with Brandon Palaniuk

Wintertime fishing requires a slightly different outlook and preparation compared to other seasons. Aside from just trying to stay warm as you search for your next bite, choosing the right gear plays a significant role in determining success.
Much of the time, anglers focus on the hot lure or color, but choosing the right piece of equipment to fish them is equally important. Bassmaster Elite series star Brandon Palaniuk is a highly technical fisherman who chooses each rod, reel, and line based on the situation. For reels, he chooses one that allows him to get the best possible performance from his baits and shares his favorites for four prime winter bass fishing techniques.
Jerkbait
The first lure Palaniuk listed is no secret for winter anglers, a jerkbait. When fishing these baits, he prefers a slightly smaller reel than many choose and either goes with a Daiwa Steez 70 CT SV TW or Tatula SV TW 70. Both are smaller 70-sized reel frames and vary by retail price.
“It really depends on your budget on what to get, but I like the smaller size, and they still hold plenty of 10 or 12-pound fluorocarbon line,” he said. “They handle all sizes of jerkbait well, but the thing I like about the smaller frame is how well you can palm them. It feels much better when you are fishing a jerkbait all day, and you’ll notice less fatigue in your forearm. Even though a 100-size reel is not much bigger, I notice a big difference.”
Both reels come in a 7.1:1 and 8.1:1 gear ratio, and Palaniuk opts for the slower of the two in colder water and bumps it up as it gets warmer. “I always start the season with the 7.1:1 and then go faster later into spring,” he said. “But the other thing you must consider is that it’s a smaller spool, so going to a faster reel will not have the same retrieve as a bigger one. It’s not going to take up as much line per handle turn, so even an 8.1:1 on a 70-size reel is not too fast for a jerkbait.”
Jighead Minnow
One of the most popular techniques in bass fishing is fishing a jighead with a minnow, which is ideal for winter bass fishing. Palaniuk prefers a Daiwa Exist spinning reel in the 3000-size when utilizing this technique.
It’s a top-of-the-line reel, and Palaniuk prefers it because it is light, smooth, and has exceptional drag.
“One thing I like about it is how smooth the drag is from start to finish of fighting a fish. It’s very smooth no matter how loose or tight you have the drag,” he said. “The smoothness of the retrieve is also critical and can be overlooked for how it impacts your technique, especially with a jighead minnow where you are constantly shaking your rod and reeling in the slack.”
Cranking
Another optimal lure for winter is a crankbait, and Palaniuk uses a variety of them depending on where he’s in the country and the depth he’s targeting.
“I love to crank in the winter, and the Zillion SV TW is my go-to reel,” he said. “The biggest reason for that is that it has all the features you want for better casting distance, like the SV spool and T-Wing System. The swept handle is also the perfect size for cranking comfortably.”
He prefers the 7.1:1 gear ratio and has noticed that the reel’s construction gives him a better feel of what his crankbait is doing at all times. “The Hyperdrive gears are very smooth, and since you usually retrieve a crankbait fairly slowly in the winter, you can feel everything your crankbait is doing. You can lose sensitivity if your gears are not smooth with each handle turn.”
Punching Vegetation
If you can still find vegetation in your local lakes this winter, Palaniuk says to get there as fast as possible. It can be one of the best ways to catch a wintertime giant.
“If I’m fishing any lake with grass, I will have a punch rig ready,” he said. “This time of year on places like Lake Okeechobee in Florida, those big prespawn females will be under those mats. My go-to reel for punching is a Daiwa Zillion 10.0 TW. It’s a heavy-duty reel.”
Palaniuk likes the beefier profile of this reel when fishing heavy cover. “It’s got a little bigger spool and bigger handles and knobs,” he said. “It’s also got bigger gears, so when you’re trying to winch a big one out cover, you give yourself the best chance to land that fish. It’s got enough power for you to do it.”
Fishing during the winter can be very enjoyable, with fewer anglers on the water and an excellent opportunity to catch a giant bass. Aside from picking the right clothing and perfect bait, choosing the proper reel can make all the difference.